Readme.md, before:

# FarmApp: An Agriculture-Themed Teaching Project for Modern Python, HTML, CSS, and JS

<span style="color: red;">This project and associated teaching are in no way affiliated with the Royal Agricultural University.</span>

In the modern agricultural workplace, technology is becoming increasingly essential, and a working knowledge of programming and scripting is a useful tool for any employee, manager, or business owner. This course aims to equip you with a basic foundation in the development of simple, visual applications which interact with a backend database and performs simple data processing with a project which is relevant for those pursuing agriculture or land-management-related professional goals.

## Learning Objectives

### What You Will Learn

Upon completion of this course you should have a basic understanding of the following:
 1. How to create and style webpages with HTML and CSS and use the styling framework Bootstrap 5,
 2. How to connect to and use web APIs using JavaScript
 3. How to create endpoints and perform simple data processing using the Python library Flask
 4. How to design an SQL database and interact with it
 5. How to write clean and maintainable code, and what the difference is between good and bad code
 6. How to use documentation to learn and debug systems

### What You Will Make

<img src="/screenshots/homepage.png" height="300" alt="The homepage">

<img src="/screenshots/field_view.png" height="300" alt="The field details page">

<img src="/screenshots/new_field.png" height="300" alt="The form to create a new field">

## Setup

First, install the Python programming language, the VSCode integrated development environment (IDE), and the version manager Git by following the instructions which can be found at these websites:
 - Python: [download here](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
 - VSCode: [download here](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)
 - Git: [download here](https://git-scm.com/install/)

I advise you regularly back-up your work to [GitHub](https://github.com/) to avoid loss of work.

Once you have a Flask setup, run it by running this command, making sure to `cd <project directory>` into the correct folder first:

`python -m flask --app main run --debug`

## Further Reading

 - [W3Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/) provides excellent materials for beginners to learn HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and SQL
 - [Bootstrap 5](https://getbootstrap.com/) will be used extensively in this project to provide styling
   - [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/) is another popular CSS framework we will not be using
 - [The Flask Library](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/) for Python is what we will be using for our backend; this site provides tutorials for its basic and intermediate features
   - [Flask-WTF](https://flask-wtf.readthedocs.io/en/0.15.x/) will be used to create forms 
   - [This tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL-osiE80TeTs4UjLw5MM6OjgkjFeUxCYH) will give some further information on other features of Flask
   - [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) is another, more advanced backend framework for Python which we will not be using
 - [SQLite DB Browser](https://sqlitebrowser.org/) will be necessary to modify and browse the database
 - [Chartsjs](https://www.chartjs.org/docs/latest/) will be used for creating charts on the dashoard
 - [This tutorial](https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/third-normal-form) by DataCamp explains in some detail the principles of database design we will be using (3rd Normal Form)

## Contact

If you have any questions about this project, please create an issue in the GitHub issues tab where I will respond as quickly as possible. You could also suggest other features or topics you would like to see there.

## Catchup

I am hoping to record the in-person classes to allow people unable to attend in-person to follow along.

Commit message:

Added codecademy recommendation to the main README file

Readme.md, after:

# FarmApp: An Agriculture-Themed Teaching Project for Modern Python, HTML, CSS, and JS

<span style="color: red;">This project and associated teaching are in no way affiliated with the Royal Agricultural University.</span>

In the modern agricultural workplace, technology is becoming increasingly essential, and a working knowledge of programming and scripting is a useful tool for any employee, manager, or business owner. This course aims to equip you with a basic foundation in the development of simple, visual applications which interact with a backend database and performs simple data processing with a project which is relevant for those pursuing agriculture or land-management-related professional goals.

### I highly recommend you take [this](https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-python-3) course before/whilst following this one

## Learning Objectives

### What You Will Learn

Upon completion of this course you should have a basic understanding of the following:
 1. How to create and style webpages with HTML and CSS and use the styling framework Bootstrap 5,
 2. How to connect to and use web APIs using JavaScript
 3. How to create endpoints and perform simple data processing using the Python library Flask
 4. How to design an SQL database and interact with it
 5. How to write clean and maintainable code, and what the difference is between good and bad code
 6. How to use documentation to learn and debug systems

### What You Will Make

<img src="/screenshots/homepage.png" height="300" alt="The homepage">

<img src="/screenshots/field_view.png" height="300" alt="The field details page">

<img src="/screenshots/new_field.png" height="300" alt="The form to create a new field">

## Setup

First, install the Python programming language, the VSCode integrated development environment (IDE), and the version manager Git by following the instructions which can be found at these websites:
 - Python: [download here](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
 - VSCode: [download here](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)
 - Git: [download here](https://git-scm.com/install/)

I advise you regularly back-up your work to [GitHub](https://github.com/) to avoid loss of work.

Once you have a Flask setup, run it by running this command, making sure to `cd <project directory>` into the correct folder first:

`python -m flask --app main run --debug`

## Further Reading

 - [Codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-python-3) provides a course on Python which I ***highly*** recommend you take at least some of before taking this course
 - [W3Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/) provides excellent materials for beginners to learn HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and SQL
 - [Bootstrap 5](https://getbootstrap.com/) will be used extensively in this project to provide styling
   - [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/) is another popular CSS framework we will not be using
 - [The Flask Library](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/) for Python is what we will be using for our backend; this site provides tutorials for its basic and intermediate features
   - [Flask-WTF](https://flask-wtf.readthedocs.io/en/0.15.x/) will be used to create forms 
   - [This tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL-osiE80TeTs4UjLw5MM6OjgkjFeUxCYH) will give some further information on other features of Flask
   - [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) is another, more advanced backend framework for Python which we will not be using
 - [SQLite DB Browser](https://sqlitebrowser.org/) will be necessary to modify and browse the database
 - [Chartsjs](https://www.chartjs.org/docs/latest/) will be used for creating charts on the dashoard
 - [This tutorial](https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/third-normal-form) by DataCamp explains in some detail the principles of database design we will be using (3rd Normal Form)

## Contact

If you have any questions about this project, please create an issue in the GitHub issues tab where I will respond as quickly as possible. You could also suggest other features or topics you would like to see there.

## Catchup

I am hoping to record the in-person classes to allow people unable to attend in-person to follow along.
